OSDOCS-18945: adds troubleshooting MCP gateway (#110076)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/proc-mcp-gateway-ts-gateway-listener-not-working.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-troubleshooting.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-ts-gateway-listener-not-working_{context}"]

> = Troubleshooting the gateway listener not working

Reviewer: I wonder if you could edit this to "Troubleshooting the gateway listener", and it would retain close to the same meaning?

[role="_abstract"]

> If your {mcpg} cannot reach an MCP endpoint at configured hostname, the cause might be that the `Listener` custom resource (CR) you configured is not working. You can troubleshoot this situation by using a few commands and some insight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your {mcpg} cannot reach an MCP endpoint at the configured hostname, the `Listener` custom resource (CR) you configured might not be working. You can troubleshoot this situation by using a few commands and some insight.
```

> Use the following concepts in conjunction with the commands that follow to solve a non-functioning `Listener` CR:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following concepts with the commands that follow to solve a non-functioning `Listener` CR:
```

* Ensure that your `Gateway` object has `Accepted` and `Programmed` conditions set to `True`.

> * Verify that the `hostname` in the `Listener` CR matches your DNS or hosts configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Verify that the `hostname` value in the `Listener` CR matches your DNS or hosts configuration.
```

.Prerequisites

* You installed {mcpg}.
* You installed the {oc-first}.
* You configured a `Gateway` object.
* You configured an `HTTPRoute` object for the gateway.

.Procedure

. Check the general `Gateway` object configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get gateway -A
----
+

> This command returns general information about all `Gateway` objects in the cluster. If the `Gateway` object you are troubleshooting does exist, the command returns the `gatewayClassName` is it using, whether or not it has an IP address or hostname assigned, and a `status`, such as `Ready`, `Programmed`, or `Pending`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command returns general information about all `Gateway` objects in the cluster. If the `Gateway` object you are troubleshooting exists, the command returns the following information:

* The `gatewayClassName` is it using, whether or not it has an IP address or hostname assigned
* The `status`, such as `Ready`, `Programmed`, or `Pending`
```
This info might be easier to read as a list.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-troubleshooting.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-ts-gateway-listener-not-working_{context}"]
= Troubleshooting the gateway listener not working

[role="_abstract"]
If your {mcpg} cannot reach an MCP endpoint at configured hostname, the cause might be that the `Listener` custom resource (CR) you configured is not working. You can troubleshoot this situation by using a few commands and some insight.

Use the following concepts in conjunction with the commands that follow to solve a non-functioning `Listener` CR:

* Ensure that your `Gateway` object has `Accepted` and `Programmed` conditions set to `True`.

> * Verify that the `hostname` in the `Listener `CR matches your DNS or hosts configuration.

Reviewer 2: remove extra space before closing backtick

.Prerequisites

* You installed {mcpg}.

> * You installed {prodname}.

Reviewer 2: Connectivity Link not needed

* You configured a `Gateway` object.
* You configured an `HTTPRoute` object for the gateway.
* You installed the {oc-first}.

> * You registered an MCP server.

Reviewer 2: Registered MCP server not needed

.Procedure

. Check the general `Gateway` object configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get gateway -A
----
+
This command returns general information about all `Gateway` objects in the cluster. If the `Gateway` object you are troubleshooting does exist, the command returns the `gatewayClassName` is it using, whether or not it has an IP address or hostname assigned, and a `status`, such as `Ready`, `Programmed`, or `Pending`.

. Check the full metadata and status history for one specific `Gateway` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc describe gateway _<gateway_name>_ -n _<namespace>_

Reviewer 2: Very minor: in all the commands that deal with Gateway object it would be good to use the same placeholder for namespace consistently. Here it is _namespace_, later it is _<gateway_system>_, I think the latter is better.

Reviewer 2: @ShaunaDiaz  Sorry, I did not notice that the word `namespace` was not displayed in my comment above (fixed now). What I wanted to tell was that all the `oc` commands that deal with Gateway object should have the same placeholder for the namespace (`gateway_system`) and Gateway object name (`gateway_name`). Examples:

`oc get gateway _<gateway_name>_ -n _<gateway_system>_ ...`
`oc describe gateway _<gateway_name>_ -n _<gateway_system>_ ...`

Reviewer 2: You can also replace all occurrences of `-n _<gateway_namespace>_` with `-n _<gateway_system>_` for the sake of consistency

----
+
* Replace `_<gateway_name>_` with the name of the `Gateway` object.
* Replace `_<namespace>_` with the namespace where the `Gateway` object is applied.
* This command can help you figure out why a `Gateway` object is stuck in `Pending` by checking for port conflicts and verifying that `SSL/TLS` certificates are correctly attached to `Listener` CRs.

. Verify the `Listener` CR configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc get gateway _<gateway_name>_ -n _<namespace>_ -o yaml | grep -A 10 listeners
----
+
* Replace `_<gateway_name>_` with the name of the `Gateway` object.

> * Replace `_<namespace>_` with the namespace where the `Gateway object` is applied.

Reviewer 2: 'object' word should be out of backticks

. Check all of your `Listener` CR configurations at the same time by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc get gateway _<gateway_name>_ -n _<namespace>_ -o jsonpath='{range .spec.listeners[*]}{.name}{"\t"}{.hostname}{"\t"}{.port}{"\n"}{end}' | jq

Reviewer 2: Remove the ` | jq` piece and remove the 'This command uses `jq` for formatting.' sentence from below

The command does not return valid JSON so `jq` cannot be used for formatting. It uses that `{"\t"}` and `{"\n"}` for formatting instead.

----
* Replace `_<gateway_name>_` with the name of the `Gateway` object.
* Replace `_<namespace>_` with the namespace where your `Gateway` object is applied.
* This command uses `jq` for formatting.

. Check that the Istio gateway pod is running by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc get pods -n _<gateway_system>_ -l istio=ingressgateway

Reviewer 2: That label only exists if full OSSMv3 was installed as a Gateway API provider. If Openshift's Ingress Operator was used (it installs only lightweight version of OSSMv3) then there are different labels there.

The only common label I can see is `gateway.istio.io/managed=istio.io-gateway-controller`
